---
published: true
category: News
layout: page
series: example
splash: "http://placehold.it/1600x500"
---
As co-chairs of the House Sovereignty Caucus, we are concerned about the impact the U.N. Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (Disabilities Treaty) will have on U.S. sovereignty and freedom. Reports have been circulating that the U.S. Senate plans to consider the Disabilities Treaty in early November even though it was defeated in the 112th Congress. We believe that joining the treaty will not enhance the rights of Americans with disabilities nor advance U.S. national interests abroad. Instead, the treaty’s vague definitions of “disability” and “sexual and reproductive health” invite abuse and the furtherance of abortion as a right, and Article 7 threatens Americans’ parental rights. 

The Disabilities Treaty establishes a body of unaccountable experts, the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which evaluates the compliance of state parties to the treaty every four years, and issues recommendations for how they might improve in fulfilling their obligations. We are concerned that joining the treaty will allow foreign experts to interfere with U.S. policymaking and violate the principles of U.S. sovereignty. Too often U.N. treaty bodies seek to broaden the scope of the treaties that created them through treaty monitoring bodies, which expand language in original agreements and disregard national sovereignty.

Additionally, we find the language in the treaty especially concerning because it lacks concise definitions of very important terms. For example, the Disabilities Treaty lacks a clear definition of “disability,” which it defines as an evolving concept. This ambiguity invites abuse by persons or groups that do not suffer from a recognized medical disability but seek resources and protection under the authority of the treaty. This could also result in complicating the implementation of the treaty in the United States.

Although the treaty’s main purpose seeks to ensure the rights and protections of the disabled, the Disabilities Treaty includes the issue of sexual and reproductive health, which some U.N. staff has interpreted as “abortion rights.” While the nations who negotiated the treaty expressly rejected that interpretation, there is reason to believe the treaty monitoring body will read a right to abortion into the treaty like other treaty monitoring bodies have done for treaties that do not even include the controversial phrase. Abortion advocates and U.N. staff have already pointed to the Disabilities Treaty as a means to further build their case in favor of abortion as a human right. We strongly oppose this.

We are also concerned that Article 7 of the treaty would give the federal government the ability to override the decisions of parents of disabled children if the government believes its views are in the best interest of the child. This could strip parents of fundamental rights, including the ability to home school their children with disabilities if they believe it is in the best interests of their child. We support the rights of the disabled within the U.S., and the U.S. already holds itself to a high standard of human rights. We believe that the rights of Americans with disabilities are well protected under existing law and are enforced by a range of state and federal agencies.

Any modification or expansion of protections to Americans with disabilities should be achieved through the legislative process – not through an international treaty. Allowing an international panel of disability experts to scrutinize the U.S. record every four years could result in many unintended consequences for U.S. interests, yielding little or no benefit in realizing disability rights for Americans.

All in all, we believe that U.S. ratification of the Disabilities Treaty would not advance U.S. national interests abroad or the rights of Americans with disabilities here at home. This treaty would subject the U.S. to further intrusion by U.N. officials into policies that are sensitive domestic and social issues, and we remain convinced that the risks to the U.S. posed by this treaty far outweigh any potential benefits that could be realized by U.S. ratification.