---
title: VuePress
date: 2018-04-16 16:59:59 +0000
license: Open Source
language: Node
urls:
  website: https://vuepress.vuejs.org/
  github: https://github.com/vuejs/vuepress
  twitter: ''
  other: ''
description: Minimalistic docs generator with Vue component based layout system
tools:
- "Static Site Generator"
related_tools: []
tags: []
resources: []
cat_test: ''
weight: ''

---
VuePress is composed of two parts: a minimalistic static site generator with a Vue-powered theming system, and a default theme optimized for writing technical documentation. It was created to support the documentation needs of Vue's own sub projects.

Each page generated by VuePress has its own pre-rendered static HTML, providing great loading performance and is SEO-friendly. Once the page is loaded, however, Vue takes over the static content and turns it into a full Single-Page Application (SPA). Additional pages are fetched on demand as the user navigates around the site.

**How It Works**

A VuePress site is in fact an SPA powered by Vue, Vue Router and webpack. If you've used Vue before, you will notice the familiar development experience when you are writing or developing custom themes (you can even use Vue DevTools to debug your custom theme!).

During the build, we create a server-rendered version of the app and render the corresponding HTML by virtually visiting each route. This approach is inspired by Nuxt's nuxt generate command and other projects like Gatsby.

Each markdown file is compiled into HTML with markdown-it and then processed as the template of a Vue component. This allows you to directly use Vue inside your markdown files and is great when you need to embed dynamic content.